What happens when you type Google.com in your browser and press enter
Advancements in Web technology have made it so that accessing any document from the internet is easy and fast. But what really goes on inside your computer when you search for something through the web? Let us get into the nitty gritty of what actually happens behind the screen.

The World Wide Web is simply a highway of information between connected computers. All documents sent through the internet are technically from another computer connected through telecommunications or optical networking. A significant distinction to make is that between the internet and the World Wide Web. While the internet is the connection of computers, a collection of documents and resources linked by hyperlinks make up the World Wide Web.

Computers connected to the internet are mapped by IP addresses, which differentiate them from one another. Thus documents’ IP addresses contain the address of the computer hosting it as well as the location of the document on that server. These IP addresses, however, are a sequence of numbers and can be quite hard to remember. For this reason, the Domain Naming System is used to differentiate between documents. An example of this is google.com’s IP address which is 142.250.72.206. You can use the address to open google.com but the domain is much easier to remember. The domain name, preceded by the protocol used to access the document such as https://www.google.com serves as the document’s Uniform Resource Locator.

Thus, when a user types google.com on the web, the first order of business of the host or client computer is to resolve the domain name to an IP address . After this is successfully done, the computer sends a http request to the computer holding that specific document, called a GET request. The computer holding the document, called the server will then send back a response indicating success or failure to fulfill the request sent by the client. Let us assume the request is successful. As google.com is a html document, the host will have to parse the document and parses the content of the document accordingly. Styles applied to the document as well as functionalities such as JavaScript and PHP scripts are also loaded. Data is also fetched from the server’s database, and this is how google can show you recent searches made on the account you are browsing with.

Process of displaying a website
Process of a website display on a browser.
The information from the web page is loaded onto the computer through the TCP/IP protocol and sent in small bits called packets to the computer. This explains why you might see images in a website loading one bit after the other. Sending of documents in packets allows for easy rectification in case parts of the web page fail to load, as opposed to re-sending the whole web page.

We have already learnt so much about the way a web page is loaded by a browser, yet we have barely scratched the surface. In truth, loading of web documents is a more complex process, with lots of happenings behind the scenes.

For example, the sensitive nature of data passed through the web has forced us to create security measures that ensure this data passed through the web is secure and encrypted. The mechanism used to do this is the Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) through firewalls.

Web documents also need servers to make sure they are always accessible; these servers keep the documents’ contents as well as their domain names and IP addresses. Larger websites require more servers.

Another integral piece of the puzzle is monitoring software, which checks the performance of the web infrastructure. As websites get more clicks or hits, it becomes necessary to employ load balancers which pass on requests to the servers in such a way that every request is handled at the fastest time possible.

A notable mention is web cookies which store local data that enables websites to personalize each user’s experience on the website. These cookies are loaded at the same time with the website.

With more functionalities, websites essentially become web applications, as they start handling requests of their own to access and modify data in their databases. The tools described above work together to give a smooth experience to the user as shown in this image of web application architecture.

Web application architecture
Advanced web design infrastructure.
To recap, when a user types in google.com:

1) The web browser resolves the URL to an IP address which it can then use to access the webpage.

2) The browser then sends a get request to the server which the IP address points to. A response is sent by the server according to the success or failure to honor that request.

3) If the request is successful, the html document is sent to the client computer in packets together with functionalities and they are then parsed and loaded on the display monitor.

-You’ve made it down here, I hope you enjoyed the read!
